blog: OCP AWS Local Zones automation on installer (#23)
mtulio/mtulio.labs: docs/blogs/ocp-aws-local-zones/ocp-aws-local-zones-413.md

# Extending Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform to AWS Local Zones

> Authors: Marcos Entenza Garcia, Marco Braga, Fatih Nar

## Overview

In Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform 4.12, we introduced the ability to extend cluster formation into Amazon Web Services (AWS) Local Zones in Red Hat OpenShift. In this post, we present how to deploy OpenShift compute nodes in Local Zones at cluster creation time, where the OpenShift Installer creates compute nodes in configured Local Zones. In addition, we share how the cluster administrator adds compute nodes in Local Zones to an existing OpenShift cluster.

> Before diving into deploying OpenShift with Local Zones, let's review what Local Zones are.

Reviewer: I'd skip this sentence unless it's introducing a whole new section. The next paragraph will flow quite naturally from the previous one.

Generally, sections and the whole document need introductions, while paragraphs do not. If you feel a paragraph is out of place, it should probably be moved to a separate section.

Author: @makentenza I am thine by removing this paragraph. WDYT?
```suggestion
```

> Local Zones allow you to use select AWS services, like compute and storage services, closer to more end-users, providing them with very low latency access to the applications running locally. Local Zones are fully-owned and managed by AWS with no-upfront commitment and no hardware purchase or lease required. In addition, Local Zones connect to the parent AWS cloud region via AWS' redundant and very high bandwidth private network, providing applications running in Local Zones fast, secure, and seamless access to the rest of AWS services.

Reviewer: This is a good chance to turn "Local Zones" into a link to some AWS docs introducing this concept. So that readers who are not satisfied with your explanation can research further.

> Local Zones allow you to use select AWS services, like compute and storage services, closer to more end-users, providing them with very low latency access to the applications running locally. Local Zones are fully-owned and managed by AWS with no-upfront commitment and no hardware purchase or lease required. In addition, Local Zones connect to the parent AWS cloud region via AWS' redundant and very high bandwidth private network, providing applications running in Local Zones fast, secure, and seamless access to the rest of AWS services.

Author: What about this?
```suggestion
Local Zones allow you to use selected AWS services, like compute and storage services, closer to the metropolitan region, and end-users, than the regular zones, providing them with very low latency access to the applications running locally. Local Zones are fully owned and managed by AWS with no upfront commitment and no hardware purchase or lease required. In addition, Local Zones connect to the parent AWS cloud region via AWS' redundant and very high-bandwidth private network, providing applications running in Local Zones fast, secure, and seamless access to the rest of AWS services.
```

![AWS Infrastructure Continuum](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/b4e68d09-bc65-40f4-91aa-1f1cbdea06e6)

<p><center>Figure-1 AWS Infrastructure Continuum</center></p>

> 

Author: Looks good!

```suggestion

### Benefits of Local Zones
```

> <p><center>Figure-1 AWS Infrastructure Continuum</center></p>

Reviewer: (here and below): I wouldn't put a dash in "Figure 1:" (but I would put a colon)

Author: Good catch! Fixed! Thanks!

> Using OpenShift with Local Zones, application developers and service consumers will reap the following benefits:

Reviewer: Love "reap the benefits", but feels a bit out of style here. For a tech blog, simpler phrasing is often better. "The benefits of using ... for ... are:"

Author: What about this?
```suggestion
Using OpenShift with Local Zones, application developers and service consumers might have the following benefits:
```

Reviewer: "Might" delivers a shade of doubt. I'm still not found of an inverse structure of this sentence "Using <something>, <someone> <gets something>". It's not terrible, I just find it somewhat heavy-weight. (Keep in mind: I'm not a native English speaker.)

> - Improving application performance and user experience by hosting resources closer to the user, Local Zones reduce the time it takes for data to travel over the network, resulting in faster load times and more responsive applications. This is especially important for applications, such as video streaming or online gaming that require low-latency performance and real-time data access.

Reviewer: The first comma should be a dot (i.e. end of sentence). Otherwise you get a pretty complex sentence (I can understand what you're trying to do - Russian also uses similar structures - but it's uncommon in technical English).

Nit: missing comma after gaming (because of "such as")

Author: ```suggestion
- Improving application performance and user experience by hosting resources closer to the user. Local Zones reduce the time it takes for data to travel over the network, resulting in faster load times and more responsive applications. This is especially important for applications, such as video streaming or online gaming, that require low-latency performance and real-time data access.
```

> - Hosting resources in specific geographic locations leads to cost savings, whereby customers avoid high costs associated with data transfer charges, such as cloud egress charges, which is a significant business expense, when large volumes of data is moved between regions in the case of image, graphics, and video related applications). 

Reviewer: Style note: better start with the key idea of each bullet point. You start both with an introductory part that essentially repeats what was said.

The benefits are:

- Improving ... performance and ... experience. <Explanation>
- Saving costs by avoiding data transfer charges, ...

Note that I'm shortening the sentence - it's really large at this point with 5 separate parts. We tend to avoid such things in technical English. Better have several connected sentences (or even better - one shorter).

- Providing regulated industries, such as ..., a way

Note how I again put the most important part "regulated industries" before specific examples. Makes it simpler to understand the key points.

Author: Good point! Thanks!

I rephrased those items with your suggestion. 🥇 💯

> - Provide healthcare, government agencies, financial institutions, and other regulated industries a way to meet data residency requirements by hosting data and applications in specific locations to comply with regulatory laws and mandates.

Reviewer: Style note: if you start a list with nouns ("improving", "hosting"), continue with nouns ("providing")

Author: ```suggestion
- Providing healthcare, government agencies, financial institutions, and other regulated industries a way to meet data residency requirements by hosting data and applications in specific locations to comply with regulatory laws and mandates.
```

> Let's walk through the steps to install an OpenShift cluster in an existing virtual private cloud (VPC) in the US Virginia (us-east-1) region by creating a Local Zone subnet, OpenShift Machine Set manifests, and automatically launching worker nodes during the installation. The diagram below shows what gets created:

Reviewer: Definitely does not feel like "overview" any more. The "installing" section should probably start here. Maybe with a sub-section "Prerequisite".

It's usually helpful to explicitly highlight where the pre-requisites are explained. Otherwise, people tend to ignore them and complain later ;)

Author: Yeah, that's a good idea. I will review that part.

Author: I added a new section starting on this paragraph naming `Hands on!`. I also added `Prerequisites` section for each  "deployment section". I will review it in the final version if I can merge the prerequisites to single at the beginning of the "hands on", or keep it for each deployment type (Day-0, Day-2/extending, benchmark, etc) - which can be consumed separately. 
Thanks!

Let's walk through the steps to install an OpenShift cluster in an existing virtual private cloud (VPC) in the US Virginia (us-east-1) region by creating a Local Zone subnet, OpenShift Machine Set manifests, and automatically launching worker nodes during the installation. The diagram below shows what gets created:

> - An standard OpenShift Cluster is installed in us-east-1 with three Control Plane nodes and three Compute nodes

Reviewer: "A standard"

- One Application Load Balancer exposes the sample application running in the Local Zone worker node

![aws-local-zones-diagram-blog-hc drawio](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/06d75201-82dd-4c13-963f-9850e8fc7d34)

<p><center>Figure-2 OpenShift Cluster installed in us-east-1 extending nodes to Local Zone in New York</center></p>

After the cluster is installed, we'll share how to add new Local Zones in Day 2 operations, deploy and expose workloads in Local Zones, evaluating the network connection time from different locations.

![aws-local-zones-diagram-ocp-lz-413-map drawio](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/2fe7ae42-5b1a-4f7c-9e95-f063489eadc6)

<p><center>Figure-3 User Workloads in Local Zones</center></p>

## Installing an OpenShift cluster with AWS Local Zones

> To deploy a new OpenShift cluster extending compute nodes in Local Zone subnets, you install a cluster in an existing VPC and create MachineSet manifests for the Installer.

Reviewer: Style: try to remove too many cases of "you". Here it can be done without any meaning loss.

Content: Is this process obvious? Maybe provide a link to OCP docs?

Author: ```suggestion
To deploy an OpenShift cluster extending compute nodes in Local Zone subnets, it is required to follow the method of installing in an existing VPC, then the installer will discover the subnets in Local Zones and create Machine Set manifests for each location.
```

> The installation process automatically creates tainted compute nodes with `NoSchedule.` This allows the administrator to choose workloads to run in each remote location, without needing additional steps to isolate the applications.

Reviewer: nit: misplaced dot within the ticks

Author: ```suggestion
The installation process automatically creates tainted compute nodes with `NoSchedule`. This allows the administrator to choose workloads to run in each remote location, without needing additional steps to isolate the applications.
```

> To deploy an OpenShift cluster extending compute nodes in Local Zone subnets, it is required to follow the method of installing in an existing VPC, then the installer will classify the Local Zone subnets as "Edge Subnets" and create Machine Set manifests for each location. See the [OpenShift documentation](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/installing/installing_aws/installing-aws-localzone.html) for more details.

Reviewer: nit: I'd finish the sentence before "then" (remember, technical English prefers shorter and less complex sentences).

I also don't quite understand the full phrase, but it may be my lack of subject knowledge.

Author: ACK. Rephrased the content with a shorter sentence. I added a new paragraph with more details. Thanks

> Once the cluster is installed, the label node-role.kubernetes.io/edge is set for each node located in the Local Zones, along with the regular node-role.kubernetes.io/worker.

Reviewer: Nit: surround any verbatim bits of configuration or code, including labels, with ticks. `node-role.kubernetes.io/edge`

Author: ```suggestion
Once the cluster is installed, the label `node-role.kubernetes.io/edge` is set for each node located in the Local Zones, along with the regular `node-role.kubernetes.io/worker`.
```

> The installation process automatically creates tainted compute nodes with `NoSchedule`. This allows the administrator to choose workloads to run in each remote location, without needing additional steps to isolate the applications.

Reviewer: nit: no comma before "without" I think (it does not start a new sub-sentence).

Author: I choosed to remove this paragram in the recent version, but now reading your comment I am not sure if I need to keep it with more theoretical context in the section recently added `AWS Local Zones limitations in OpenShift`, or just point to the official OCP docs for more details.

Once the cluster is installed, the label `node-role.kubernetes.io/edge` is set for each node located in the Local Zones, along with the regular `node-role.kubernetes.io/worker`.

> Note the following considerations when deploying a cluster in AWS Local Zones:

Reviewer: These seems to be the things to consider (hence considerations) before installing, so maybe move them to a new section of the previous chapter?

Author: Moving it up makes sense, specially to a section before the "Hands-on", I think! I also wondering if I need to keep those items in the blog post or leave it to the OCP docs, as we detailed the restrictions there.

Let me try to create a section between Hands-on and "OpenShift and AWS Local Zones". Let me know your thoughts :)
Thanks

Author: I added a section `AWS Local Zones limitations in OpenShift` with those items

- The Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) between an Amazon EC2 instance in a Local Zone and an Amazon EC2 instance in the Region is 1300. This causes the cluster-wide network MTU to change according to the network plugin that is used on the deployment.

> - Network resources such as Network Load Balancer (NLB), Classic Load Balancer, and Nat Gateways are not supported in AWS Local Zones.

Reviewer: nit: NAT

Author: ```suggestion
- Network resources such as Network Load Balancer (NLB), Classic Load Balancer, and NAT Gateways are not supported in AWS Local Zones.
```

> - The AWS Elastic Block Storage (EBS) `gp3` type volume is the default for node volumes and the default for the storage class set on AWS OpenShift clusters. This volume type is not globally available in Local Zone locations. By default, the nodes running in Local Zones are deployed with the gp2 EBS volume. The `gp2-csi` StorageClass must be set when creating workloads on Local Zone nodes.

Reviewer: nit: `gp2` (you use ticks with gp3 and gp2-csi)

Author: ```suggestion
- The AWS Elastic Block Storage (EBS) `gp3` type volume is the default for node volumes and the default for the storage class set on AWS OpenShift clusters. This volume type is not globally available in Local Zone locations. By default, the nodes running in Local Zones are deployed with the `gp2` EBS volume. The `gp2-csi` StorageClass must be set when creating workloads on Local Zone nodes.
```

Install the following prerequisites before you proceed to the next step:

- [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html)

> - [OpenShift Installer 4.13+](https://console.redhat.com/openshift/downloads)

Reviewer: You're requiring 4.13+ but linking to the docs of 4.12. This is something to be mindful of, when preparing a post before an official release.

- [OpenShift CLI](https://console.redhat.com/openshift/downloads)

### Step 1.  Create the VPC

> This section is optional. Create a VPC with your preferred customizations, as recommended in [Installing a cluster on AWS into an existing VPC](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/installing/installing_aws/installing-aws-vpc.html).

Reviewer: Unless it's really obvious, you should mention why it is optional.

Here it's a bit controversial because you define environment variables that are used everywhere afterwards. At least that part is not optional.

Author: ```suggestion
Create a VPC with your preferred customizations, as recommended in [Installing a cluster on AWS into an existing VPC](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/installing/installing_aws/installing-aws-vpc.html).
```

Create a VPC with your preferred customizations, as recommended in [Installing a cluster on AWS into an existing VPC](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/installing/installing_aws/installing-aws-vpc.html).
Define the environment variables:

~~~bash
$ export CLUSTER_NAME=demo-lz
$ export CLUSTER_BASEDOMAIN="example.com"
$ export AWS_REGION=us-east-1

> ~~~

Author: I think i addressed it, but still not sure if where I added was the best place: prerequisites section inside `Extending...`(Day-2), as I am not using it in the install-config.yaml, providing an example IC, instead of rendering it like I was doing.

Those vars, defined in `Extending...`, is used in subsequent sections.

Download the following CloudFormation Templates with the following names:

> - template-vpc.yam: [CloudFormation template for the VPC that uses AWS Local Zones](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/installing/installing_aws/installing-aws-localzone.html#installation-cloudformation-vpc-localzone_installing-aws-localzone)

Reviewer: nit: yaml

Author: ```suggestion
- template-vpc.yaml: [CloudFormation template for the VPC that uses AWS Local Zones](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/installing/installing_aws/installing-aws-localzone.html#installation-cloudformation-vpc-localzone_installing-aws-localzone)
```

Create the VPC with CloudFormation Template:

~~~bash
$ export STACK_VPC=${CLUSTER_NAME}-vpc
$ aws cloudformation create-stack --stack-name ${STACK_VPC} \
     --template-body file://template-vpc.yaml \
     --parameters \
        ParameterKey=ClusterName,ParameterValue=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
        ParameterKey=VpcCidr,ParameterValue="10.0.0.0/16" \
        ParameterKey=AvailabilityZoneCount,ParameterValue=3 \
        ParameterKey=SubnetBits,ParameterValue=12

$ aws cloudformation wait stack-create-complete --stack-name ${STACK_VPC}
$ aws cloudformation describe-stacks --stack-name ${STACK_VPC}
~~~

![ocp-aws-localzones-step1-cfn-vpc](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/08c01da3-416b-4a70-a253-a931086ea978)

<p><center>Figure-4: CloudFormation Stack for VPC</center></p>

### Step 2.  Create the public subnet in the AWS Local Zone

Create the subnet on Local Zone (New York [us-east-1-nyc-1a]), and set the variables used to Local Zones.

~~~bash
$ export STACK_LZ=${CLUSTER_NAME}-lz-nyc-1a
$ export ZONE_GROUP_NAME=${CLUSTER_REGION}-nyc-1

# extract public and private subnetIds from VPC CloudFormation

> $ export VPC_ID=$(aws cloudformation describe-stacks \

Reviewer: Step 1 was optional, but here you're referring to its outcome?

Author: +1. Moved to non-optional! :)

> Create the subnet on Local Zone (New York [us-east-1-nyc-1a]), and set the variables used to Local Zones.

Reviewer: Not sure which syntax you had in mind here with [us-east-1-nyc-1a], it's rendered as it is.

Author: me neither haha =) Just fixed it in the newer version!

     --template-body file://template-lz.yaml \
     --parameters \
        ParameterKey=ClusterName,ParameterValue="${CLUSTER_NAME}" \
        ParameterKey=VpcId,ParameterValue="${VPC_ID}" \
        ParameterKey=PublicRouteTableId,ParameterValue="${VPC_RTB_PUB}" \
        ParameterKey=LocalZoneName,ParameterValue="${ZONE_GROUP_NAME}a" \
        ParameterKey=LocalZoneNameShort,ParameterValue="nyc-1a" \
        ParameterKey=PublicSubnetCidr,ParameterValue="10.0.128.0/20"

$ aws cloudformation wait stack-create-complete --stack-name ${STACK_LZ} 

$ aws cloudformation describe-stacks --stack-name ${STACK_LZ}
~~~

![ocp-aws-localzones-step2-cfn-subnet-nyc-1a](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/e6e25f4f-b76d-4214-8639-9a9dc176ad5f)

<p><center>Figure-5: CloudFormation Stack for Local Zone subnet in NYC</center></p>

The network setup is ready! Now you can set up the OpenShift installer to create a cluster in the existing VPC.

![ocp-aws-localzones-step2-subnets](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/7f1ba097-95c6-4022-92a6-9714c52b5928)

<p><center>Figure-6: VPC Subnets</center></p>

### Step 3. Setup the Install configuration

> To install OCP in existing subnets, the field `platform.aws.subnets` must be set with the subnets IDs created in the last section.

Reviewer: Be careful with the context. You haven't talked about install-config yet (unless I missed it), so it's unclear which field you have in mind.

Author: 👍🏽  steps removed in the refresh for 4.14!

  --stack-name "${STACK_VPC}" \
  | jq -r '.Stacks[0].Outputs[0].OutputValue' | tr ',' '\n')

$ mapfile -t -O "${#SUBNETS[@]}" SUBNETS < <(aws cloudformation describe-stacks \
  --stack-name "${STACK_VPC}" \
  | jq -r '.Stacks[0].Outputs[1].OutputValue' | tr ',' '\n')
~~~

- Local Zone subnets:

~~~bash
# Set the SUBNET_ID to be used later
export SUBNET_ID=$(aws cloudformation describe-stacks --stack-name "${STACK_LZ}" \
  | jq -r .Stacks[0].Outputs[0].OutputValue)

# Append the Local Zone subnet to the subnet ID list
SUBNETS+=(${SUBNET_ID})
~~~

Lastly, create the `install-config.yaml` with the subnets:

~~~bash
$ cat <<EOF > ${PWD}/install-config.yaml
apiVersion: v1
publish: External
baseDomain: "${CLUSTER_BASEDOMAIN}"
metadata:
  name: "${CLUSTER_NAME}"
platform:
  aws:
    region: ${CLUSTER_REGION}
    subnets:
$(for SB in ${SUBNETS[*]}; do echo "    - $SB"; done)
pullSecret: '<CHANGE_ME: pull-secret-content>'
sshKey: |
  '<CHANGE_ME: ssh-keys>'
EOF
~~~

All 7 subnets, including Local Zone, must be defined:

~~~bash
$ grep -A 7 subnets ${PWD}/install-config.yaml
~~~

**Optionally**, check the generated Machineset manifests generated:

> > The installer will automatically discover the supported instance type for each Local Zone and create the MachineSet manifests. The Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) for the cluster network will automatically be adjusted according to the network plugin set on install-config.yaml.

Reviewer: nit: this is the syntax of a blockquote, not sure if it's a good idea to use it for notes (imagine it gets rendered with quotation marks in the internal blogging platform).

Author: ACK. I removed those details and those notes approach in the newer version.

~~~bash
$ export KUBECONFIG=$PWD/auth/kubeconfig
$ oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/edge
NAME                          STATUS   ROLES         AGE     VERSION
ip-10-0-128-81.ec2.internal   Ready    edge,worker   4m46s   v1.26.3+b404935
~~~

You can also check the machine created by Machineset added on install time:

~~~bash
$ oc get machines -l machine.openshift.io/cluster-api-machine-role=edge -n openshift-machine-api
NAME                                        PHASE     TYPE          REGION      ZONE               AGE
demo-lz-knlm2-edge-us-east-1-nyc-1a-f2lzd   Running   c5d.2xlarge   us-east-1   us-east-1-nyc-1a   12m
~~~

![ocp-aws-localzones-step4-ocp-nodes-ec2](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/7d6c9c54-dc6e-41eb-84b4-7288533b7890)

<p><center>Figure-7: OpenShift nodes created by the installer in AWS EC2 Console</center></p>

## Extend an existing OpenShift cluster to new AWS Local Zones

This step describes the Day 2 operations to extend the compute nodes to new Local Zones locations in an existing OpenShift cluster, be sure the VPC running the cluster has enough CIDR blocks to create the subnet(s).

> Refer to `Step 2` in the last section to create subnets in Buenos Aires (Argentina), zone name `us-east-1-bue-1a`.

Reviewer: "Step 2" should be an internal link for easier navigation.

Also, in this situation, it's better to highlight the difference. This phrase can be read to imply that Step 2 creates subnetes in Buenos Aires, which is not the case.

Author: May be a better approach?
```suggestion
Repeat the [Step 2](#step-2--create-the-public-subnet-in-the-aws-local-zone) to create subnets in Buenos Aires (Argentina) using the zone name `us-east-1-bue-1a`. The location of Buenos Aires was intentionally picked as it currently does not support AWS Application Load Balancers (ALB), used in New York zone (`us-east-1-nyc-1a`).
```

> > Note: if the cluster wasn't installed using IPI with Local Zone subnets, the Maximum Transmit Unit (MTU) for the cluster-wide network must be adjusted before proceeding. See the OpenShift documentation for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> > Note: if the cluster wasn't installed using IPI with Local Zone subnets, the Maximum Transmit Unit (MTU) for the cluster-wide network must be adjusted before proceeding. See the OpenShift documentation for more information.

Author: I just realized that I added it in the user docs from installer for the full IPI feature:
https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/7137/files#diff-d4da2968a241c2898ad36d96733640d0392692a1c7c1941a0a80e120a4f0af32R478

But I think we should not point github docs to blog posts, so I would wait for the definition of Day 2 in product docs.

> > Note: if the cluster wasn't installed using IPI with Local Zone subnets, the Maximum Transmit Unit (MTU) for the cluster-wide network must be adjusted before proceeding. See the OpenShift documentation for more information.

Author: Recently the requirement of day2 was added. A new doc book will be added for Local Zones, the PR is in progress at https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/63729

I moved that "note" to a prerequisites for that section, and linked the future product docs page to it.

Thanks for pointing it.

![ocp-aws-localzones-step5-cfn-subnet-bue-1a](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/486f4361-d8c3-4810-b5bb-0fd7a6c0fc46)

<p><center>Figure-8: CloudFormation Stack for Local Zone subnet in us-east-1-bue-1a</center></p>

Finally, to create nodes using the new zone, the MachineSet manifest must be added setting the zone attributes. The steps below show how to check the instance offered by the zone, and create the MachineSet manifest based on the existing one in the Local Zone of Buenos Aires(`us-east-1-bue-1a`):

> > Note: The Local Zone of Buenos Aires (`us-east-1-bue-1a`) was intentionally picked as it currently does not support AWS Application Load Balancers (ALB), used in New York zone (`us-east-1-nyc-1a`).

Reviewer: It's a useful note, but should probably come right after the related part (i.e. the part where you ask to create subnets in this zone, currently on line  245)

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Finally, to create nodes using the new zone, the MachineSet manifest must be added setting the zone attributes. The steps below show how to check the instance offered by the zone, and create the MachineSet manifest based on the existing one in the Local Zone of Buenos Aires(`us-east-1-bue-1a`):

Reviewer: nit: missing space before (

                  \"values\":[\"${INFRA_ID}-worker-sg\",\"${INFRA_ID}-lz-ingress-bue-1\"]
                }] }]}}}}}}"
~~~

- Scale the node and wait for the machine creation

~~~bash
$ oc scale --replicas=1 -n openshift-machine-api $MCSET_BUE
$ oc get machines -n openshift-machine-api -l machine.openshift.io/cluster-api-machine-role=edge -w
NAME                                        PHASE         TYPE          REGION      ZONE               AGE
demo-lz-knlm2-edge-us-east-1-bue-1a-zd8zs   Provisioned   m5.2xlarge    us-east-1   us-east-1-bue-1a   8m47s
demo-lz-knlm2-edge-us-east-1-nyc-1a-f2lzd   Running       c5d.2xlarge   us-east-1   us-east-1-nyc-1a   55m
(...)
~~~

> It can take some time to finish the provisioning by AWS, make sure the machine is in the Running phase before proceeding.

All done, now the cluster is installed and running into two Local Zones, New York (US) and Buenos Aires (Argentina).

![ocp-aws-localzones-step5-ec2-bue-1a](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/545342e3-8298-41d8-be4a-7542ab4d9e16)

<p><center>Figure-9: OpenShift nodes running in AWS Local Zones in EC2 Console</center></p>

## Deploy workloads in AWS Local Zones

> As described in the section "Installing an OpenShift cluster with AWS Local Zones", there are a few use cases to run workloads in Local Zones. This post demonstrates how to take advantage of Local Zones by deploying a sample application and selecting workers running in Local Zones.

Reviewer: Better use links when referring to sections.

Author: ```suggestion
As described in the section ["Installing an OpenShift cluster with AWS Local Zones"](#installing-an-openshift-cluster-with-aws-local-zones), there are a few use cases to run workloads in Local Zones. This post demonstrates how to take advantage of Local Zones by deploying a sample application and selecting workers running in Local Zones.
```

Three deployments will be created:

- Application running in the Region, ingress traffic using the default router
- Application running in Local Zone NYC (US) ingressing traffic using Application Load Balancer
- Application running in Local Zone Buenos Aires (Argentina) ingressing traffic directly to the node (currently the zone does not support AWS Application Load Balancers)

The `edge` compute nodes deployed in Local Zones have the following extra labels:

> ~~~bash

Reviewer: nit: this is not bash

Author: ```suggestion
~~~yaml
```

machine.openshift.io/zone-type: local-zone
machine.openshift.io/zone-group: us-east-1-nyc-1
node-role.kubernetes.io/edge: ""
~~~

You must set the tolerations to `node-role.kubernetes.io/edge`, selecting the node according to your use case.

> The example below uses the `machine.openshift.io/zone-group` label to select the node(s), and creates the deployment for a sample applicatiosn in the respective zone's network border group:

Reviewer: nit: application (typo)

Author: ```suggestion
The example below uses the `machine.openshift.io/zone-group` label to select the node(s), and creates the deployment for a sample application in the respective zone's network border group:
```

NAME                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE     IP            NODE                          NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
app-bue-1-689b95f4c4-jf6fb     1/1     Running   0          5m4s    10.131.2.6    ip-10-0-156-17.ec2.internal   <none>           <none>
app-default-857b5dc59f-r8cst   1/1     Running   0          75s     10.130.2.24   ip-10-0-51-38.ec2.internal    <none>           <none>
app-nyc-1-54ffd5c89b-bbhqp     1/1     Running   0          5m31s   10.131.0.6    ip-10-0-128-81.ec2.internal   <none>           <none>

 $ oc get pods --show-labels
NAME                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE     LABELS
app-bue-1-689b95f4c4-jf6fb     1/1     Running   0          5m16s   app=app-bue-1,pod-template-hash=689b95f4c4,zoneGroup=us-east-1-bue-1
app-default-857b5dc59f-r8cst   1/1     Running   0          87s     app=app-default,pod-template-hash=857b5dc59f,zoneGroup=us-east-1
app-nyc-1-54ffd5c89b-bbhqp     1/1     Running   0          5m43s   app=app-nyc-1,pod-template-hash=54ffd5c89b,zoneGroup=us-east-1-nyc-1
~~~

## Create Ingress for each application

It's time to create the ingress to route the internet traffic on each location.

> When this blog has been written, Local Zones has limited support of AWS Load Balancers, supporting only AWS Application Load Balancer (ALB) with limited locations. To expose your application to end users with ALB, you must create, when supported, a custom ingress for each location by using the [AWS Application Load Balancer (ALB) Operator](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/networking/aws_load_balancer_operator/understanding-aws-load-balancer-operator.html).

Reviewer: nit: "When this blog post was written, Local Zones had ..."

~~~bash
$ cat << EOF | oc create -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service 
metadata:
  name: app-bue-1
  namespace: ${APPS_NAMESPACE}
  labels:
    zoneGroup: us-east-1-bue-1
    app: app-bue-1
spec:
  ports:
    - port: 80
      targetPort: 8080
      protocol: TCP
  type: NodePort
  selector:
    app: app-bue-1
---
apiVersion: route.openshift.io/v1
kind: Route
metadata:
  name: app-bue-1
  namespace: ${APPS_NAMESPACE}
  labels:
    type: sharded
spec:
  host: app-bue-1.apps-bue1.${CLUSTER_NAME}.${CLUSTER_BASEDOMAIN}
  port:
    targetPort: 8080 
  to:
    kind: Service
    name: app-bue-1
EOF
~~~

Finally, patch the EC2 Security Group with ingress rules allowing traffic through HTTP(80) and HTTPS(442) used by the new router:

~~~bash
$ aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress \
    --group-id $SG_ID_BUE \
    --protocol tcp \
    --port 80 \
    --cidr "0.0.0.0/0"

$ aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress \
    --group-id $SG_ID_BUE \
    --protocol tcp \
    --port 443 \
    --cidr "0.0.0.0/0"
~~~

Discover and set the Buenos Aires' ingress address:

~~~bash
$ APP_HOST_BUE="$(oc get route.route.openshift.io/app-bue-1 -o jsonpath='{.status.ingress[0].host}')"

> $ IP_HOST_BUE="$(oc get nodes -l topology.kubernetes.io/zone=us-east-1-bue-1a -o json | jq -r '.items[].status.addresses[] | select (.type=="ExternalIP").address')"

Author: This needs to be improved.

The new `IngressController` running in BUE is not creating DNS `app-bue-1.apps-bue1.${CLUSTER_NAME}.${CLUSTER_BASEDOMAIN}`.

I am not sure if this is the expected behavior as there is no address from Load Balancer.

The expectation is to use the public IP address of node running the route, but it could break the HA when having more than one node in Local Zones.

$ curl -H "Host: $APP_HOST_BUE" http://$IP_HOST_BUE
~~~

> Note: DNS config: the controller is not adding the DNSes to the public zone for the custom ingress controller. How DNS creates RR automatically for the sharded routers which don't use service LB, but HostNetwork with public IP address on the host interface?

## Benchmark the applications

> As commented at the begging of this post, we'll test each application endpoint from different locations on the internet, some are closer to the metropolitan regions located in the Local Zone, so we'll be able to measure the network benefits of using edge compute pools in OpenShift.

Reviewer: nit: s/begging/beginning/

0.024175        0.178215     0.337317           0.338611
0.029904        0.183622     0.338799           0.340016
0.016936        0.172481     0.331656           0.333060
0.023056        0.174012     0.332869           0.333940

# Collecting request times to server running in Local Zone NYC [endpoint k8s-localzon-ingressl-573f917a81-716983909.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com]
time_namelookup time_connect time_starttransfer time_total
0.023081        0.182175     0.339818           0.340769
0.022908        0.187502     0.353711           0.354144
0.024140        0.181430     0.342511           0.343637
0.016736        0.175075     0.337191           0.338269
0.017669        0.180589     0.342865           0.343365

# Collecting request times to server running in Local Zone BUE [endpoint app-bue-1.apps-bue1.demo-lz.devcluster.openshift.com]
time_namelookup time_connect time_starttransfer time_total
0.000016        0.044052     0.090594           0.091382
0.000018        0.043565     0.090848           0.091869
0.000015        0.046529     0.092182           0.092997
0.000019        0.043899     0.089382           0.090326
0.000016        0.044163     0.089726           0.090368

~~~

> Aggregating the results:

Reviewer: nit: add errors to the summary for credibility

Author: That's a good point. I am thinking about how to add it positively

![ocp-aws-localzones-step8-aggregated-results](https://github.com/mtulio/mtulio.labs/assets/3216894/9250fb62-fd99-4c31-9d77-178c82e38cb7)

<p><center>Figure-12: Average connect and total time with slower points based on the baseline (fastest)</center></p>

> The total time to connect, in milliseconds, from the client in NYC (outside AWS) to the OpenShift edge node running in Local Zone was ~66% faster than the server running in the regular zones. It's also worth mentioning that there are improvements in clients accessing from different countries, looking at the results from the client in Brazil decreased by more than 100% of the total request time when accessing the Buenos Aires server, instead of going to the Region due to the geographic proximity of those locations.

Reviewer: nit: time is normally higher/lower, processes can be faster/slower

Author: TY! fixed
